## GopherCon UK 2023

08.22.2023

This year I attended GopherCon UK 2023, the annual UK-based conference focused on the Go programming language. The conference consists of talks and workshops over 2 days, covering everything from the latest features presented by the Go team at Google, deep-dives into Go internals, and success stories throughout the Go start-up community. In this blog, I'll give a whistle-stop tour of the 5 talks that got me thinking the most.

### The State of Go in 2023

### Standard Logging

### Distributed Tracing with OpenTelemetry

### Modifying the Go Runtime

### The Go Compiler

Finally, the last talk I went to was a deep-dive into the Go compiler. The main take-away for me was that the compiler is basically just fancy data transformation - the goal is to take the Go code in your IDE and turn it into machine code that can be ran as an executable. Sure, there are some optimisations that take place, but after listening to this talk I became a lot less scared of digging into the compiler source code myself.

To summarise, there are 10 steps to go from Go code to an executable:

1. The Scanner - Generate tokens by scanning character by character.
2. The Parser - Generate an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) per file.
3. The Type Checker - Check some types (the speaker did not go into any detail here, and implied it needed it's own talk!)
4. The Intermediary Representation (IR) - Generate one IR per package from the AST, and infer information about types.
5. The IR Passes - Optimise! For example, eliminate dead-code (i.e. code paths that can never be reached) and de-virtualize (i.e. replace interfaces with concrete implementations where possible).
6. The Static Single Assignment (SSA) - Starting to look like Assembly...
7. The SSA Passes - Use the SSA to further optimise, e.g. by deleting more dead-code that died as a result of previous optimisations. This is also the first step where the hardware is actually relevant.
8. The Machine Code Generation - Create an architecture-specific binary.
9. The Linking - Again, the speaker brushed over this, but essentially this is the stage where we link up with the Go runtime.
10. The Execution!

### Conclusion
