## A Software Engineer at a Climate Change Conference

11.07.2023

Late last year, I started a new role as a backend engineer at a ClimateTech start-up called Arenko. I've gone from fighting financial crime to optimising energy storage systems.

So in May I decided to attend Innovation Zero, a Climate Change conference in London that focuses on using innovative technologies to achieve a net-zero world. Throughout the day I learned a lot, but most of it can be summarised in three major themes.

### This is our Last Chance

The conference opened with two heavy weights in the world of climate repair, Prof. Sir David King and Prof. Johan Rockstrom, who made it absolutely clear that this is our last chance to *not* destroy the planet. Global temperatures are now over 1.2°C above pre-industrial levels, and we're on track for 2.5°C by the end of the century. There are 7 years left until we hit 1.5°C, which would lead to 14% of the world's population facing a severe heatwave every 5 years. That figure increases to a whopping 37% at 2°C. At 1.5°C, each year Europe would have a 42% chance of an annual heatwave of the scale of the 2003 heatwave that lead to 20,000 deaths. At 2°C, that would increase to a 59% chance. We are scarily close to a coin flip each year that risks 20,000 deaths in Europe due to climate change.

The speakers were particularly scathing on the COP negotiations, attributing our lack of progress to the conference in which representatives from every country in the world haggle for a good individual position with everyone else over a couple of days. When King was the Chief Scientific Adviser to the UK Government between 2000 and 2007, he lead bi-lateral talks to hold other countries accountable to progress on climate repair world-wide. The lack of similar bi-lateral talks at COP, he thinks, is a huge loss, and that progress must be fast-tracked financial incentives, similar to the $30 billion committment made by the 2015 Paris Climate Conference. Their final wish was an "end date on coal and fossil fuels", and that anything less than a global committment to an end date is simply not enough.

Ending on a slightly more optimistic note, they pointed to Norway as a model example where 90% of cars sold are now electric or hybrid, and how Scandinavia is "beyond the internal combustion engine" already - so why not the rest of the world? But there was still a sense of panic, and they encouraged the audience to build out both new technologies such as CCS (Carbon Capture and Storage), and expand existing renewables and battery storage, "5 to 10 times faster". No pressure.

### The Inflation Reduction Act

Almost every single talk afterwards referenced the IRA (Inflation Reduction Act). This was a bill signed in the US late last year which increased investment in climate change technologies, with a total of $369 billion provided by the government in the form of tax credits, loans, and grants. Recent studies by the Brookings Institution predicted that the bill will put the US on track to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 levels by an additional 6-11% by 2030. Further studies published in Science were even more optimistic, predicting a total reduction of between 43-48% below 2005 levels by 2035. Furthermore, the increase in renewables and storage production will help create over 9 million green jobs, as well as expanding US energy independence.

But speakers at the conference, start-up founders and NGO directors alike, were extremely critical. Zenobe Energy, Carbon Engineering, and Ripple Energy were amongst those warning of its impact to UK-based start-ups. The key problem for these companies is that the IRA imposes requirements on certain clean technologies like EVs to have US-made parts, obviously threatening European manufacturers. This, along with subsidies for solutions like green hydrogen, are encouraging European companies to move across to the US to continue their business.

The sentiment wasn't that the IRA was *bad* legislation - after all, it's empowering the most powerful economy in the world to massively speed up green tech production. The warning was that Europe will fall behind if it doesn't quickly replicate the same incentives. Hugh Brady, president of Imperial College London, expressed this too early this year, stating that the IRA is an "existential threat" to the UK and EU, and that London and Brussels must work together to compete and have leadership on climate technology innovation.

### Bringing Change Closer to the Individual

Finally, there was a lot of talk about "putting the customer first".

This initially came up in the first Energy workshop of the day with OFGEM's Deputy Directory of Strategy & Decarbonisation, in which they proudly stated "successful innovation must start with the customer". The vagueness of the sentiment, along with typical start-of-conference audio problems, made it hard for me as a newbie to really get much out of it.

It became much clearer later in the day what they were getting at. For example, Ripple Energy, one of the start-ups complaining about the IRA, enable individuals to acquire part-ownership in a local solar park or wind farm. At £2000 per share, consumers get their energy supply from local renewable sources while protecting themselves from spiking prices. Meanwhile, individuals are brought much more into the equation for taking climate action.

Unfortunately, the UK is gridlocked from such schemes becoming more widespread. The Head of Energy Storage at the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero (DESNZ) confirmed that there is 23GW of projects for new renewables and storage stuck in the queue for a grid connection until 2028. That's enough energy to power the whole of the UK. Part of this is down to manufacturing issues, for example a 42-month wait for grid transformers, but also to outdated and inefficient processes at National Grid. For the time being, most UK citizens don't have access to local windfarms or solar panels in the way that Ripple Energy are providing shares in. If OFGEM want to bring climate action closer to the customer, enabling renewables and storage projects to get fast-tracked and participating in efficient energy markets has got to come first. 

### Conclusion

That's the gist of what happened at Innovation Zero this year. There's a lot for us to get on with to avoid destroying the planet, so I'll go back to doing my bit. Right now, that consists of adapting Arenko's software architecture, so that our storage units can automatically participate in new markets designed to stabilise the electricity grid as more renewables come online.
